RFC: Design doc for flow `modules` (#2898)
grafana/agent: docs/rfcs/0007-flow-modules.md

# Flow Modules

* Date: 2023-01-27
* Author: Matt Durham @mattdurham
* PR: [grafana/agent#2898](https://github.com/grafana/agent/pull/2898)
* Status: Draft

[Formatted Link for ease of user](https://github.com/grafana/agent/blob/rfc_modules/docs/rfcs/0007-flow-modules.md)

## RFC Goals

* Explain the use cases of modules
* Explain what modules are
* Go over possible syntax for modules
* Go over pros and cons of modules

## Summary

> One of the primary goals for the production usage of Agent Flow is parity with the static subsystem. One of the features of the static subsystem is [scraping service](https://github.com/grafana/agent/blob/main/docs/sources/configuration/scraping-service.md). Scraping service allows a user to run a fleet of agents and have thousands of scrape configurations distributed among running Agents. Through discussions within the Agent Team, we did not want to limit dynamically loading content to only scrape configs but allow most components to be loaded and used.

Reviewer: Should we add link to Agent Flow rfc?

### Any type of versioning

Modules will not contain any sort of versioning nor will check for compatibility outside the normal river checks.

### Any user interface work beyond ensuring it works as the UI currently does

Users will not be able to drill into modules, they will be represented as any other normal component. 

## Example

```river
// module
argument "password" {
    optional = false
    comment = "password for mysql"
}

argument "username" {
    optional = false
    comment = "username for mysql"
}

export "targets" {
    comment = "targets for the integration"
    value = integrations.mysql.server1.targets
}

integrations.mysql "server1" {
    username = argument.username.value
    password = argument.password.value
}

```

```river
// parent

local.file "mysql" {
    filename = "/test/mysql.river"
}

module.string "mysql" {
    content = local.file.mysql.content
    arguments = {
        {
            "password" = PASSWORD,
            "username" = USERNAME,
        }
    }
}

prometheus.scrape "scraper" {
    targets = module.string.mysql.exports.targets
}

```

## Limitations

> * A module cannot directly or indirectly load itself, this will not be enforced by the system

Reviewer 2: s/will not/will ?

* Singleton components are not supported at this time. Example [node_exporter](https://grafana.com/docs/agent/latest/flow/reference/components/prometheus.integration.node_exporter/).
* Modules will not prevent competing resources, such as starting a server on the same port
* [Configuration blocks](https://grafana.com/docs/agent/latest/flow/reference/config-blocks/#configuration-blocks) will not be supported. 
* Names of arguments and exports within a module must be unique across that module.

## Proposal

Add the ability to load `modules` as subgraphs to the primary `graph`. Modules may call other modules within a reasonable stack size depth. Modules are represented as a river string that is interpreted with a defined set of arguments and exports.

> The initial component will be `module.string` that will load a single module. Internally these modules will be namespaced so they cannot affect children or parent graphs except via arguments and exports.

Reviewer 3: If a module reports certain metrics, then what would happen if we import the module more than once? I guess that there will be a label to indicate the fully qualified module name which contains these metrics?

Author: The namespace will include the parent labels, so that will prevent duplication. 

```river
module.string "modulo" {
    content = "some string that's valid"
}

module.string "samestringmodule" {
  content  = "some strings that's valid"
}
```

In the above, the components for `module.string.modulo` will be prefixed with `module.string.modulo` which trickles down to `data-agent` and metric nanes. Components under `module.string.samestringmodule` would be prefixed with `module.string.samestringmodule`.

## RFC Goals

* Explain the use cases of modules
* Explain what modules are
* Go over possible syntax for modules
* Go over pros and cons of modules

## Summary

One of the primary goals for the production usage of Agent Flow is parity with the static subsystem. One of the features of the static subsystem is [scraping service](https://github.com/grafana/agent/blob/main/docs/sources/configuration/scraping-service.md). Scraping service allows a user to run a fleet of agents and have thousands of scrape configurations distributed among running Agents. Through discussions within the Agent Team, we did not want to limit dynamically loading content to only scrape configs but allow most components to be loaded and used.

During this time the Agent team saw a lot of potential in modules outside of scraping service. Packaging up sets of components for specific workflows, publishing common use cases and allowing better usage for internal customers in the Agent as a Service model.

## Goals

* Support single module loading via `module.single`
* Support multiple module loading via `module.multiple`
* Enable re-use of common patterns

> * Allow loading a module from a string

Author: Wanting to already shift this, I think it should be a label set with key ‘contents’ with the content and ‘id’ for an optional unique id. This will allow metadata to be passed since I also want to add a metadata component into the module.

Author: Torn over this for an ease of use mechanism. Maybe `module.single` loads from a string and `module.multiple` loads from a labelset.

Reviewer 4: Aiming for consistency is something I think modules should value, since the mental model of how to use them shouldn't differ too wildly between loading a single module or many at a time. If that means an initial hurdle on getting familiar with the system (since modules are already somewhat of an intermediate feature in terms of difficulty) for the single use case, personally that feels like an acceptable tradeoff.

Users will not be able to drill into modules, they will be represented as any other normal component. 

## Example

```river
// module
argument "password" {
    optional = false
    comment = "password for mysql"
}

argument "username" {
    optional = false
    comment = "username for mysql"
}

export "targets" {
    comment = "targets for the integration"
    value = integrations.mysql.server1.targets
}

integrations.mysql "server1" {
    username = argument.username.value
    password = argument.password.value
}

```

```river
// parent

local.file "mysql" {
    filename = "/test/mysql.river"
}

module.single "mysql" {
    content = local.file.mysql.content
    arguments = {
        {
            "password" = PASSWORD,
            "username" = USERNAME,
        }
    }
}

prometheus.scrape "scraper" {
    targets = module.single.mysql.exports.targets
}

```

## Limitations

* Duplicate modules cannot be nested, this may or may not be enforced by the system
* Singleton components are not supported at this time. Example node_exporter.
* Modules will not prevent competing resources, such as starting a server on the same port

> * Component-like objects will not be supported. Example direct access to logging level 

Reviewer 5: I did a quick first pass, and this is the only part where I'm not sure what you're taking about here. Could you explain?

Author: I should have used the term `Configuration blocks` but was trying to be vague and failed ;)

Reviewer 5: Haha, ah, I see. Yeah, for the sake of reaching a wider audience with the RFC, using the terminology we use in the docs is probably the best bet to get everyone on the same page (so they can look up with a configuration block is if they don't already know)

#### Option 1: When a module fails then fail itself and children.

If an error occurs while re-evaluating a module then the module marks itself as unhealthy and unloads the original module and all children.

*Pros*

* Simple to implement
* Easy to understand

*Cons*

* One failure mode can cascade

#### Option 2: Modules keep last good value

If an error occurs while re-evaluating a module then the module marks itself as unhealthy and attempts to keep the original module. This may have an issue with cascading failures, if a module depends on a module then the system may enter an inconsistent state while applying and then rolling back the change.

For example, `Module A` has two sub-modules `Module B` and `Module C`. During reevaluation `Module B` reloads appropriately but `Module C` fails. `Module A` unloads both modules and then reloads the last good string. In the case that the last good string also fails then `Module A` is unhealthy and non-functional and `Module A's` submodules do not exist.

*Pros*

* Allows more resilient usage

*Cons*

* Can create undefined behavior
* Complex to unload and reload

## `modules.multiple`: Allowing multiple modules to be loaded at once

> Note: This feels the most experimental of the topics listed.

Reviewer 2: If in the future we'd implement #2783 to have a language-level filter functionality, would you envision being able to selectively load modules using that?

Also, would we need modules.multiple then, or could they be loaded in sequence using a map function?

# Flow Modules

* Date: 2023-01-27
* Author: Matt Durham @mattdurham
* PR: [grafana/agent#2898](https://github.com/grafana/agent/pull/2898)
* Status: Draft

[Formatted Link for ease of user](https://github.com/grafana/agent/blob/rfc_modules/docs/rfcs/0007-flow-modules.md)

## RFC Goals

* Explain the use cases of modules
* Explain what modules are
* Go over possible syntax for modules
* Go over pros and cons of modules

## Summary

One of the primary goals for the production usage of Agent Flow is parity with the static subsystem. One of the features of the static subsystem is [scraping service](https://github.com/grafana/agent/blob/main/docs/sources/configuration/scraping-service.md). Scraping service allows a user to run a fleet of agents and have thousands of scrape configurations distributed among running Agents. Through discussions within the Agent Team, we did not want to limit dynamically loading content to only scrape configs but allow most components to be loaded and used.

> During this time the Agent team saw a lot of potential in modules outside of scraping service. Packaging up sets of components for specific workflows, publishing common use cases and allowing better usage for internal customers in the Agent as a Service model.

Reviewer 5: I don't want to do too much feedback on formatting for my first review pass, but I'd like to see this be more clear that you're creating a new term and defining it on the next sentence:

```suggestion
During this time the Agent team saw a lot of potential in the idea of "modules." Modules package up sets of components for specific workflows, publishing common use cases and allowing better usage for internal customers in the Agent as a Service model.
```

Reviewer 4: +1, this also makes the Goals section underneath much clearer as to what it's trying to communicate

## Goals

* Support single module loading via `module.single`
* Support multiple module loading via `module.multiple`
* Enable re-use of common patterns
* Allow loading a module from a string
* Allow modules to load other modules

> * Modules should be sandboxed except via arguments and exports

Reviewer 2: Components are sandboxed in the same way too, right? Is there any other limitation you'd like to impose, or do you simply mean eg. not being able to modify the loaded module code?

Author: Yes, I want to state that even if you know the full namespace id of a component you cannot access it.

### Enable re-use of common patterns

Common functionality can be wrapped in a set of common components that form a module. These shared modules can then be used instead of reinventing use cases. 

### Allow loading a module from a string

Modules will not care about the source of a string. In the case of a `module.single` the module will take in one string of valid river configuration. In the case of `module.multiple` the module will take in a `map(string)` where the key uniquely denotes the module.

### Allow modules to load other modules

Modules will be able to load other modules, with reasonable safe guards. There will be a stack limit for the depth of sub-modules and modules will be unable to load themselves.

### Modules should be sandboxed except via arguments and exports

Modules cannot directly access children or parent modules except through predefined arguments and exports. 

> ## Non Goals

Reviewer 5: Can we add a sentence explaining if the non-goals are simply out of scope and may be handled later, or if they're explicitly incompatible with the way we're designing modules?

Author: IMO out of scope but may change later. I will add the verbiage.

> * Add additional capabilities to load strings

Reviewer 5: "load strings" here feels ambiguous. I'm assuming you're talking about module sources? 

I'd like to suggest we introduce three new terms for this RFC to make things clearer:

* Module source: a Flow config file which will be used as a module 
* Main module: the Flow config file passed into `agent run MAIN_MODULE`.  
* Module loader: a component which takes a module source and runs the components defined inside.

Reviewer 5: Given my [comment](https://github.com/grafana/agent/pull/2898#issuecomment-1414827146) about FlowModule CRDs, I think module loaders should be conceptually flexible enough that some module loaders are given a module source, while others may discover module sources on their own.

Author: In this RFC, I want to only focus on the 3rd use case. The other two feel like solid things to do once we have solidified the core functionality.

Reviewer 5: Sorry, I'm confused. What use cases? I'm just suggesting we break down what we're already describing in this RFC into those three terms.

Reviewer 5: Yes, I was suggesting that the way Flow functions now is by loading the "main module." You could say that the main module has different constraints (i.e., configuration blocks are only valid in the main module, but no submodule).

* Any type of versioning
* Any user interface work beyond ensuring it works as the UI currently does

> *Note* should security be a non-goal? For example can a submodule spawn a `local.file`, should there be the ability to pass a deny list of modules, and/or allow list? 

Author: I think this is needed long term but not for this RFC and maybe not for Modules v1. I think there is nuance in that we cannot JUST filter by component name but by component functionality. IE don't allow network, don't allow file system.

Reviewer 4: +1 on your comment, having capability based permissions that can be applied on a module long term would be a nice addition long term, being able to define interactions with FS or remote_writes etc, but that feels like a much larger thing to discuss about the overall component eco-system in Flow :)

> *Note* should metadata be a non-goal? Metadata would allow better filtering the ability to tag modules, also will allow programmatic access to things that might otherwise be in comments. 

Author: I would like to see a component that wraps `map(string)` to allow for arbitrary key-value pairs that are then exposed somehow, but I don't think we have to determine that in this RFC. The use case would be being able to extract information from modules, and the ability to filter if we export modules as label sets. The metadata becomes a label `metadata_NAME = VALUE`.

> *Note* should metadata be a non-goal? Metadata would allow better filtering the ability to tag modules, also will allow programmatic access to things that might otherwise be in comments. 

Reviewer 4: For this RFC I don't think so, but in order for modules to serve the use case of Agent-as-a-Service as laid out in the summary, metadata is pretty vital.

Author: Agreed, go to change this from a `should we`, to a this is a non-goal for v1 but a long-term goal.

### Add additional capabilities to load strings

> Modules will not care about the source of the string that represents the river syntax, nor will modules have any inherent reload semantics. The component supplying the string will be responsible for the source and will notify the module when the input changes so that it can utilize the new river configuration.

Reviewer 5: Are we saying the initial module loader will only support strings and that we may add more module loaders in the future (i.e., `module.git`), or if we will explicitly only ever permit getting a module source from another component?

Author: For modules v1, a module input is explicitly a string. Will also mark that this is only a v1 consideration and other implied sources may happen. I am going to remove `module.multiple` from the RFC and mark it as a future goal.

Author: Renamed `module.single` to `module.string` to give more room for different types of module loaders in the future.

### Any type of versioning

Modules will not contain any sort of versioning nor will check for compatibility outside the normal river checks.

### Any user interface work beyond ensuring it works as the UI currently does

Users will not be able to drill into modules, they will be represented as any other normal component. 

## Example

```river
// module
argument "password" {
    optional = false
    comment = "password for mysql"
}

argument "username" {
    optional = false

>     comment = "username for mysql"

Reviewer 5: We parse River comments into the AST, so having a comment attribute isn't necessary. We could do this:

```river 
// Username for MySQL.
argument "username" {
  optional = false
}
```

Author: My fear here is that since comments would not be a field it will require people knowing it exists by convention. We can document the behavior but being a field makes it more inline with how components normally work.

Reviewer 3: Is the "comment" argument going to be read by something, or is it just meant to be a regular comment for the users who read and edit the river file? If it's used by other components/modules/UIs then I could see why it's an attribute, but if it's just a comment then I'm not sure I see the advantage vs. a regular river comment.

Author: It's metadata. Having all other metadata be attributes and comments not feels weird.

}

export "targets" {
    comment = "targets for the integration"
    value = integrations.mysql.server1.targets
}

integrations.mysql "server1" {
    username = argument.username.value
    password = argument.password.value
}

```

```river
// parent

local.file "mysql" {
    filename = "/test/mysql.river"
}

module.single "mysql" {
    content = local.file.mysql.content
    arguments = {
        {
            "password" = PASSWORD,
            "username" = USERNAME,
        }
    }
}

prometheus.scrape "scraper" {
    targets = module.single.mysql.exports.targets
}

```

## Limitations

> * Duplicate modules cannot be nested, this may or may not be enforced by the system

Reviewer 5: Can we make a decision for this RFC whether module loaders prevent this?

Also, I'm not 100% sure what you mean by "duplicate modules cannot be nested." Do you mean that a "module cannot directly or indirectly load itself?" That may be clearer.

Author: Let's go with its not enforced by the system. Will change the verbiage.

* Singleton components are not supported at this time. Example [node_exporter](https://grafana.com/docs/agent/latest/flow/reference/components/prometheus.integration.node_exporter/).
* Modules will not prevent competing resources, such as starting a server on the same port
* [Configuration blocks](https://grafana.com/docs/agent/latest/flow/reference/config-blocks/#configuration-blocks) will not be supported. 

> * Arguments and exports within a module must be unique

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
* Names of arguments and exports within a module must be unique across that module.
```

## Proposal

Add the ability to load `modules` as subgraphs to the primary `graph`. Modules may call other modules within a reasonable stack size depth. Modules are represented as a river string that is interpreted with a defined set of arguments and exports.

> The initial component will be `module.single` that will load a single module. Internally these modules will be namespaced so they cannot affect children or parent graphs except via arguments and exports.

Reviewer 5: I'm not sure about the name, but I don't think we need to settle on a name for the RFC.

> Modules will have access to any standard function and any other component exempting singletons. Internally each component in the module will have an `id` that is prepended with the parent's `id` for identification purposes outside of the module. Within the module a component can reference another sibling component normally. There are no known limits on the datatype that a module can use as an argument or export.

Reviewer 4: It might help to put an example of the `id`  you mention here. Correct me if I'm wrong, but how this reads to me is if I had the following graph of module dependencies:
`A -> B -> C -> D`
Then a component in module `D`, let's call it a `discovery.relabel "relabeler"` would have an `id` field on it that looks like `ABCD`. 

The word 'internally' is throwing me of here. Is this `id` intended to be used by the end user to reference/identify a component nestled deep in a module dependency path, or is this just for debugging/logging?

Author: The configuration you write does not care but the only reason I included it is because of metric naming and passing the data path for components to use. So for a metric you may have `failed_requests{id="module.single.loki.loki.receiver.syslog.mysyslogreceiver"} 0`. In this case the `module.single.loki "loki"` module loads component `loki.receiver.syslog "mysyslogreceiver"` The data path for any file system usage would be equally odd.

`modules.multiple` will use the key of the `map(string)` to uniquely identify a specific module.

### Component Options

> Given the above example, the `id` of `integrations.mysql "server1"` would be `module.single.mysql.integrations.mysql.server1`. The `data-agent` field would also be prefixed. There are some inherent issues, deeply nested metrics are likely to run into Prometheus label value limits. On Windows platforms there could be issues with the `data-agent` length. These are issues that currently exist in Agent Flow but are more easily hit using deeply nested modules.

Reviewer 5: I'm not sure about using `.` to concatenate the ID of the module loader with the ID of the component, since it may be confused with referencing an export from the module loader. 

Can we use another character like `/` or `:`? (`/` would be better for filesystems though)

### Failure Modes

> #### Option 1: When a module fails then fail itself and children.

Reviewer 4: I do like this approach since it matches up with the idea that modules essentially append sub-graphs onto the overall graph that makes up the Agent configuration, so if the parent breaks you'd expect the failure to cascade down the children. I do see the issue of siblings to the module graph potentially breaking from this, but I guess the call on this is how Flow wants to shape how people should think about the tree of components. 

Option 2 is more relevant to a production use case, though, so in that context Option 2 seems the most correct option for where Flow wants to exist :)

If an error occurs while re-evaluating a module then the module marks itself as unhealthy and unloads the original module and all children.

*Pros*

* Simple to implement
* Easy to understand

*Cons*

* One failure mode can cascade

> #### Option 2: Modules keep last good value

Reviewer 5: I'm in favor of this. This is how the Flow main file works today. Failing the module with its children sounds potentially disastrous.

Author: This is the ideal situation, and the one we can start with but I think there is some flexibility here. In the current reload we only have to check to see if the config is valid once, in modules that can happen many times and we will need to keep the many old and new sub-graphs running. I have concerns this may lead to duplication.

Reviewer 3: I think if we go with this approach, we would have to indicate to the users which modules/components failed to load  the latest value.

What are the main reasons for not being able to load the latest value? Is it only due to invalid config (e.g. River syntax issues)?

The safest approach imo would be that if a config reload fails a subsection of the graph, the whole graph needs to run on the last valid state, and not just a subsection of it.

If an error occurs while re-evaluating a module then the module marks itself as unhealthy and attempts to keep the original module. This may have an issue with cascading failures, if a module depends on a module then the system may enter an inconsistent state while applying and then rolling back the change.

For example, `Module A` has two sub-modules `Module B` and `Module C`. During reevaluation `Module B` reloads appropriately but `Module C` fails. `Module A` unloads both modules and then reloads the last good string. In the case that the last good string also fails then `Module A` is unhealthy and non-functional and `Module A's` submodules do not exist.

*Pros*

* Allows more resilient usage

*Cons*

* Can create undefined behavior
* Complex to unload and reload

> ## `modules.multiple`: Allowing multiple modules to be loaded at once

Reviewer 5: It feels like there can be a ton of discussion around this component alone. What do you think about leaving it out of the scope of the modules RFC and just starting with one way to load modules?

Reviewer 4: I agree with this, mainly since the multi-use case introduces a lot of additional complexity that doesn't necessarily need to be discussed up front with the idea of modules. Flow describes itself as[ being made up of components](https://grafana.com/docs/agent/latest/flow/concepts/components/)that handle a single task (which of course _can_ go very deep, but thus far most components scope is not huge by any means).

Modules take this one step further and provide a wrapper over multiple components to give you a black box of sorts that does something more interesting/common use case/etc, which is great! Multi-module support feels like sugar on top of that for when you want to bundle _even more_, instead of just listing all the individual pieces together and keeping track of a large list. That's also great, but feels like jumping the gun while we're still figuring out what it means to load a _single module_; sugar before the tea, cart before the horse, and all that :^) 

That's just my 2c, but I 100% agree the multi-module aspect should be moved into its own RFC once what a module is has been more solidified.

Author: Agreed with the above and removing `modules.multiple`.

Note: This feels the most experimental of the topics listed.

> Exports are accessed via `module.multiple.LABEL.exports.NAME`, `exports` is a `map(array)`. The `exports` label is used to prevent any collision if other fields are added to `modules.multiple`

Reviewer 5: It feels like we're missing information here for what exactly `module.multiple` would do.

## Option 1: No filter 

Depend on filtering the `map(string)` input before loading the modules.

#### Filter prior

> Assume all files in `/configs/*river` are appropriate for the `module.multiple.load`. This has the advantage of being simplifying the usage of modules and development. This also mirrors `module.single` in the being simple and pushing verisoning/usage to other components. Downside is users are unable to put all configs in one folder and magically work.

Reviewer 6: versioning*

> Assume all files in `/configs/*river` are appropriate for the `module.multiple.load`. This has the advantage of being simplifying the usage of modules and development. This also mirrors `module.single` in the being simple and pushing verisoning/usage to other components. Downside is users are unable to put all configs in one folder and magically work.

Reviewer 4: `... has the advantage of *being simplifying*` can probably drop being here :)

```river

// Note this doesnt exist and should only be used for representative purposes.
local.files "loadfolder" {
    folder_path = "/configs" # Assume this outputs a map(string)
    filter = "*.river"
}

module.multiple "load" {
    source = local.files.loadfolder.contents
}

prometheus.scrape "module" {
    // The module.multiple coalesces multiple exports into an array. 
    targets = module.multiple.load.exports.targets
}

```

> ## Option 2: Filter

Reviewer 5: A third option would be to say that the set of module sources gets combined into a single module, such that arguments, exports, and component names must be globally unique. 

I'm not sure I understand what the value in having multiple distinct module sources being loaded as multiple modules from one component is yet, so it feels to me like combining the sources into a single module is equivalent in terms of convenience.

Allow `filter_arguments` and `filter_exports` to only include modules that define arguments and exports in the filters. Modules may have additional arguments that can optionally be set.

#### Filter by arguments and exports

> Pass all files to both `load` and `load2` filtering if they have the appropriate input. This can lead to duplicate loading of modules if a module defines both `input1` and `input2`.

Reviewer 4: I like this approach a lot, since it's essentially just filtering based on if a module implements some interface which is easy to understand and makes using third party modules simpler.

> Pass all files to both `load` and `load2` filtering if they have the appropriate input. This can lead to duplicate loading of modules if a module defines both `input1` and `input2`.

Reviewer 4: Are you meaning arguments when you mention `input1` etc here? If so the terminology should be consistent

```river

// Note this doesnt exist and should only be used for representative purposes.
local.files "loadfolder" {
    folder_path = "/configs" # Assume this outputs a map(string)
    filter = "*.river"
}

module.multiple "load" {
    source = local.files.loadfolder.contents
    filter = ["input1"]
}

module.multiple "load2" {
    source = local.files.loadfolder.contents
    filter = ["input2"]
}

```

> # Example Documentation for `argument`

Reviewer 5: Is this really example documentation? Or are you proposing what the `argument` block supports? It wasn't clear to me that this was relating back to the argument block schema until I saw that the comment attribute was defined here.

## Arguments

The following arguments are supported:

Name            | Type                | Description                                                                                | Default | Required
--------------- | ------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ |---------| --------

> `optional`  | `bool` | If an argument has to be specified. |    "false"     | no

Reviewer 6: I think we talked about this 1 and using the false as default which makes sense. If we decide it makes sense for the default of `optional` to be true we could always rename this to `required` default false.

Author: Absolutely.
